In recent times, a very popular segment on the Gilead graduations has been a video presentation
that features one of the instructors along with the students called the Inside Story.
And we're happy to present such a program today.
The instructor who is going to serve as moderator of this discussion is brother Trent Lippold.
And the students are going to get a chance to see what they look like on camera.
Enjoy the program.
February 1st, 2018 marked an anniversary for the Watchtower Bible School of Gilead.
Over the past 75 years, Gilead graduates have been going out to the ends of the earth
to strengthen and stabilize Jehovah's Organization.
And we just love reading yearbook experiences and many of them are from just those places
that Gilead graduates have gone to.
Well today we have the special opportunity to see and to hear some of the experiences
of the 144th class of Gilead.
So it's my pleasure to welcome you to this edition of the Inside Story.
Well we'd like to introduce right away our first guest in this brother Alejandro Besco
pay from Bolivia.
Welcome Alejandro.
It's great to have you with us today.
You and your wife, Yvonne, you served together in the Bolivia branch.
Can you tell us a little bit about what you do there?
For the last 11 years I have been working in the service department, helping to organize
the preaching efforts in the country.
Very nice.
And before you came to Bethel, what were you doing?
Before Bethel, my wife and I spent some years in the circuit work and before that we were
special pioneers.
Very nice.
So being in the branch in the service department in Bolivia must give you a nice opportunity
to see the work that's going on in Bolivia.
Would you mind giving us a little update of how the work's going in Bolivia?
Of course.
Currently we have more than 27,000 publishers in Bolivia and the last year we had an increase
of 4%.
And we can see a great potential for the future because we are conducting more than 43,000
Bible studies.
Wow.
That is amazing.
Sounds like the truth is reaching everywhere in Bolivia.
Well, actually not everywhere, but we are improving.
So what do you mean by that, not exactly everywhere?
Bolivia has about 11 million people and while most live in urban areas, there is about 35,000
living in isolated spots along three main rivers in the north, Madre de Dios River, Beni
River and Mamore River.
So what are you doing to reach those people?
Well, in 2015, brothers are starting to organize four by four preaching campaigns.
Four by four, that's interesting.
We're here, we preach two by two.
So yes, four by four refers to our vehicles.
Of course.
Last year, we have more than 300 vehicle groups participating in this campaign.
We were able to reach many villages, but not all of them because some had no road access
at all.
Wow, that isolated.
So how do you reach these places then that have no road access?
Well, we began renting boats.
We were able to reach many villages for the first time.
We started many Bible studies and after that, we reported the success to the service committee
of the government.
Wow.
That sounds, I mean, it sounds like you solved the problem.
Yes, I know.
We realized that in order to continue preaching there, we needed just a small thing, our own
boat, your own boat, what was wrong with the rented boat?
Was there a problem?
Well, not a problem, but many problems.
Here's an example of the boats we used to rent.
You can see there are wooden, old, people and supplies are all crammed together and in
order to be more effective, we realized that we needed our own boat.
To be a little bit safer too, I suspect?
Yes, you cannot be effective if you are squished.
So, tell us, did you get your own boat?
Yeah, and even we gave it a name, the messenger of the kingdom, or in Spanish, the mensajero
de Reino.
Very nice.
So what's it like, how does preaching with boats work?
What can I show you?
Sure.
Bolivia river witnessing is started with wooden boats, but La Jehovah says, instead of the
wood, he will bring in better, stronger materials.
Messenger of the kingdom is custom made for river witnessing, it's small, so it can be
taken to different towns on launch closer to where we'll preach.
The roof holds literature and supplies.
Over 200 pioneers apply to help.
They meet plenty of creatures on the river.
With some, you don't want to get too close.
Jehovah's beautiful creation is part of the journey, but the brothers and sisters are
looking for people, once rightly disposed for everlasting life.
They'll often find interest in the morning, make return visits in the afternoon, and invite
them to a meeting that same even, a trip last seven to ten days.
All the work and preparation is worth the effort, and before they know it, it's back on
the river and on to the next village.
Wow, Alejandro, that looks very exciting.
Yes, of course, there are many potential dangers, like animals, strong currents, rocks,
but it's worth it.
For example, in the village of Baranquilla, brothers met Alejandro, the first time they
came.
And the next time, the whole village was waiting with Alejandro, over 40 people.
All of them wanted to hear the good news, and many Bible studies were started.
The tremendous response, I think Alejandro, you're going to have a lot more applicants
to go on these boat preaching tours.
So what would you say has been the effect on the publishers who make the trips to preach?
Well, honestly, at first, we were concerned about sending pioneers to the jungle, but
they actually thank it as, because they say it was very encouraging to share the truth
with many interested people.
They said it was a spiritual gift for them.
For me and other brothers in the branch, it was very faith-strickening to see how Jehovah
removed any obstacle in order to the people can hear the good news.
Very nice.
I mean, in its faith-strickening to us to be able to see those experience, I can see why
those pioneers thank you for that opportunity.
You have a nice privilege of organizing this work, working in the service department,
but let me ask you, Alejandro, how many trips have you been on?
Ah, not yet.
My wife, Iván, says that I need to become a good swimmer first.
Your wife, Iván, is a smart woman.
Thank you very much, Alejandro, for sharing your experiences with us.
So we'd like to invite out our next guest, and it's Brother Arlindo Tito from Mozambique.
Welcome, Arlindo.
Arlindo, you coming from Mozambique, would you mind sharing a little bit of your background
with us?
Sure.
I inherited the truth from my parents, saying my grandparents, and from the last seven
years, I've been working at the branch in Mozambique for some time in our Jewish department,
but for most of the time in our county department.
Ah, that's a beautiful spiritual heritage that you have, and now Gilead School.
Have I understand that one of your assignments at Bethel was connected with part of the rich
spiritual history of Mozambique?
Yes, I had this privilege, but I could say that it all started with singing.
Singing?
How, how was that?
Could you explain that?
Well, there was a time that singing was like a spiritual anchor for the brothers in Mozambique.
Before 1991, we ended up in Mozambique, so because the brothers didn't want to get involved
with it in political, and they were sent to a concentration camp.
It was a education camp, so the government was trying to change their minds.
So the life there could be very difficult, but the brothers would find a way to worship
Giova.
They would meet secretly this example of a meeting that was held there in the middle of the
forest at that time.
Must have been very anxious for them, anxious moments of having to meet together in secret
like that.
Yes.
So at that time that singing became like a spiritual anchor for them, right at the beginning
they were singing to say courageous.
In fact, the authorities were surprised because the brothers instead of crying, they were
singing.
And at that time, all the brothers would teach other brothers to read musical notes, and
they would memorize the songs.
And when they had no Bible or some books, when they were together, they would just sing.
Now that is absolutely beautiful, the power of kingdom songs, very nice.
So we know after the ban in 1991, the brothers were now free to worship.
So did singing continue to be an important part of their worship?
Well, that's what we wanted.
Sounds like there's a story, would you mind explaining that?
After the ban, we had many new ones coming into the truth, but in many rural areas in Mozambique,
we have no electricity, no sound system, no recording of the songs.
So at that time, it became a real challenge for the brothers to sing at the meetings.
What about the older ones?
The ones who sang in the camps, couldn't they help the new ones?
Yes, but many of them had moved away.
They were special in the cities.
So in rural areas, there was a great need.
Okay, but what about song books?
Surely you had song books?
Yes, we had them.
But most could not read the musical notes.
So they would sing, yes, but the melody would sound a little bit different from what we
know.
Yeah.
So now we had freedom, they could worship and go over, but because of not having a song
system, they could enjoy fully the meetings, because they couldn't hear clearly what was
being taught at the meetings.
I must have been very discouraging, in a sense.
Well, did they get the help they needed?
Yes, they did.
And this is the beauty of this organization, Joe Verilpec's scale of everyone in his organization.
In 2011, the global passions in department found a player that would really fit for our
needs.
What do they call the player?
We call unity player.
It comes from the idea of singing in unity with our worldwide brotherhood.
Okay, unity player, what does it look like?
It's not big.
I have one here, can I show you?
Absolutely.
Here he is.
I was wondering what that was, I thought it was your lung.
Probably my lunch would be bigger than this.
But as you can see, it's very easy to carry, very easy to operate, and it's very practical.
It can be plugged in if they have power, but if they don't have power, it comes with a
small solar panel, so it can be chatted by the sun.
You can charge it with the sun?
Yes.
Okay.
And we have plenty of sun, so that's not a problem.
But even if the sun fails, it comes with this hand crank, so it can be chatted manually.
Chatted by hand?
Exactly.
That's very useful for us there in Mozambique.
And it has a little place here that you can insert a micro SD card with all the songs.
So now it's just to play and sync.
Very nice, but it looks like that's not all.
Yes, it comes here with this microphone.
So after singing, this unit play can be used as a sound system, so they can hear clearly
what it's been taught at the meeting.
Well, it sounds like there's a lot more than your lunch would.
Exactly.
You're exactly.
I think it would be so neat just to be able to see a congregation when they get a unity
player for the first time.
Well, actually you can see that.
Just take a look.
OK.
This is the Net Symbane congregation in the south part of Mozambique.
Psalm 33 tells us to sync praises to Jehovah along with the shouts of joy.
But with no sound system, if they shout joyfully or sing full from the heart like they want
to, they will not hear the music.
Listening to the spiritual food can also be difficult.
To help, the brothers send a request for a unity player to the branch.
The broadcast department tests the new player.
SD cards, all loaded with all of the audio and video material, are available to them in
shangan.
Everything they need is packed inside and is soon on its way to the congregation.
Set up is easy and they quickly learn how to use the solar panel to charge the unit.
This meeting will be different.
Now they are able to sync to Jehovah the way their hearts move them.
The Net Symbane congregation greatly appreciates this blessing and sends their love.
It's beautiful to see the joy in their faces when they get a unity player and again they're
able to sing.
So we'll be interesting to see what new technology is available that will be able to help Jehovah's
people even the remotest parts of the earth to benefit in their true worship.
Thank you so much Arlindo for being with us today.
Many of us have a favorite kingdom song or original song, often because it evokes in us
a certain emotion.
When we'd like to invite some of the students to the stage now and they've specially arranged
and are prepared to perform for us one of our kingdom songs.
Let's listen to them.
The touching song and it very nicely introduces our next couple and their amazing story.
Let's welcome Brother Laddie and Cecilia Sandi.
Brother and sister Sandi you're coming from Sierra Leone and I understand in 1997 you participated
in the construction of the branch and soon thereafter began serving there.
Is that correct?
Yes, very correct.
We are happily serving at the branch.
So I understand that things didn't remain that way, did they?
No, things changed really quickly because our country was divided into several war and
then just a month after the branch dedication in rebels attacked freedom.
So Laddie, what happened?
The foreign missionaries we have acquitted to a safer place in neighboring Guinea and the
expatriate battleite also left the country.
So who was left at the branch then, Laddie?
Just seven of us.
Cecilia, three single brothers and a couple of myself.
Okay, so did you stay just the seven of you then in the branch?
No, things started getting worse and the brothers keep coming to the branch to seek refuge.
We are so many, we couldn't get them all at the branch, we started distributing them
to the different missionary homes in freedom.
So how many were you then at the branch?
We are about seven to eight brothers and sisters at the branch.
Wow, that's amazing.
So how, Cecilia, how did you care for all of those brothers and sisters?
Well, we shared a food that we had and the better family kept eating less and less.
So our dear brothers, we had what they needed.
Okay, well they look happy in that photograph, although Laddie, the picture doesn't look so
good.
That's true.
It survived the war.
That's why you have some scratches on it.
Okay, right, I understand.
So when you were there, Cecilia, were you able to go out at all?
Yes, we did.
We did our best to go out in the ministry, but before going out in the morning, we have
to listen to the news, the government's radio and Bush radio.
Ah, okay, government radio, I understand, but Bush radio, I'm not sure I understand what
that is.
Oh, it's the news that you get by a word of mouth.
So the brothers will give their news, pass a buy, will give their news, and then you
decide where it's safe to go that day.
Okay, I get Bush radio, interesting.
Did you ever feel in danger?
Were you in danger at the branch?
Yes.
One night, a brother and myself, we are the lobby, and two armed rebels appear demanding
that we open the door to them to gain access into the branch.
So we are so frightened, we run to safety, and they start shooting at the door, the locks
at the door, but the door remain firm, and they didn't think of shooting into the glass
because the door has two glass, and that will help them to get easy access into the building
itself.
Oh, I couldn't.
That was a very close call, so was that the end of it?
No.
Again, they jump the fence as you can see in the picture, and this time, they are about
20 or more, well, I'm, and they shot their way into the branch.
They start looting, everything in the branch, they can lay hands on.
It was a big mess.
I mean, that must have been absolutely terrifying.
It was.
What helped is the brothers before that time, they prepared a safe room for also hiding
in the case of any emergency, but that room was never my favorite.
I didn't want it to go in that room.
Did you have another room that you thought you might like to go?
I did.
I had my room that I preferred.
It had food inside.
It had AC inside, very nice and clean.
It was very comfortable for me.
Cecil, did you tell Ladi about that?
No, I didn't tell him.
I didn't mention it to anybody.
I just told Jehovah what I wanted to do, and I kept telling him that I hope the brothers
will change their decision.
But why didn't you tell Ladi?
I really didn't want to influence him about how I felt and what I wanted, and because
it was not about us.
It was not about me.
It was about Jehovah and his people.
That's very nice.
Ladi was responsible for many there, and you didn't want to put that pressure on him.
Very interesting.
Thank you.
So, Ladi, what happened now?
You're down in the room.
What happened next?
We're in that safe room, trying very hard to see out of sight.
And one of the rebels came to the door where we were hiding, trying to gain access into
the door.
When I was pushing at it, forcing his way, and I had one of the other men yelling at him,
come from that place.
You seem to be too greedy.
We have more than enough.
Come, let's go.
And they just left like that.
You came out then?
No, we were still there till the following morning.
It must have been terrifying there in that room.
So, was that the end then of troubles?
No, that was not the end.
The rebels also launched another operation, known as Operation Non-Living Team.
Hang on, Operation Non-Living Team, what would that mean, Ladi?
Well, this was an operation that decided to just kill anybody that comes their way.
Any living team, dogs, animals, humans, being, they just spread it like that.
That was the operation that was launched.
You said there were other refugees in the missionary homes.
How were they fairing at this time?
They were not doing fine.
They were suffering just like us, but we have some money with us at the branch.
So I decided to take some money for them, because if they have money, they can get food
to survive.
Well, do is expensive.
And it was also very dangerous to take such a journey.
So Cecilia decided to go with me.
Cecilia, why did you decide to go with Ladi?
I decided to go because I thought if Ladi was willing to die for his brothers, that's
what it meant for him to help them, then I might as well die with him.
I didn't want them to leave to explain what happened.
Can you tell us, Ladi, how did what happened?
We were able to reach the missionary home.
Yes, we put the money in to get a bag, and because we have seas of roadblocks, checkpoints
that we have to go through, and we decided to put some debti clothes and stinky rags on
top of the money.
It would prevent them from going deep down to get access to the money.
And by having access to the money, they would either kill us and take the money.
So we made it through several of these checkpoints.
As we were approaching the missionary home, the last checkpoint there, we saw a group of
boys, men, women, jubilating, just jumping up and down the street.
You mean celebrating?
They were celebrating?
What were they celebrating?
Well, they were chanting that we've dropped the enemy jets, we've dropped the enemy jets,
we've done it again, we're happy.
What did you do then to get through the checkpoint?
So we started to jump up and down with them, and the strategy to just get our way through
to the missionary home.
So that's theocratic strategy.
That's a little bit like David when he went to the city of Gah and disguised his sanity.
Okay.
I wonder though, how did you think of that?
Well, it just came spontaneously with Jehovah Joss directed us to do that, because this
was not our plan, and we were not expecting things like that to happen.
Sure.
Well, Jehovah helps in every situation, excellent.
So you got through the checkpoint now, so what happened, you made it to the missionary
home?
Yes.
As we are very close to the missionary home, we threw the bag into the compound, the missionary,
the home.
The brothers came and took the bag where we gain access safely into the missionary home,
delivered the money, and we tried to go back to the branch.
And you were able to make it back to the branch?
Yes.
Safely.
That is an absolutely incredible story, Ladi and Cecilia, thank you so much for sharing
it with us.
Well, we know that in 2002, the Civil War ended, and how is Jehovah blessed, the brothers
and sisters in Sierra Leone, after enduring so much, since that time?
We have a video that we like to show, you want to see it?
I thought you might have one.
I'd love to see it.
Okay.
Let's watch.
Many believe that some two hundred years ago, freed American slaves founded freedom under
the squatting tree.
For nearly a hundred years, Jehovah's Witnesses have comforted people with hope of a better
freedom, the glorious freedom of the children of God.
During the 11-year civil war, 700 people were baptized, and since the war ended in 2002,
the number of publishers has more than doubled.
Here at the branch, we welcome visitors to see how we are savage Jehovah and caring for
people's spiritual need.
We have sold this once-run sack, literature has been shipped to 40 congregations.
Other better lights continue to work hard for Kingdom interests.
This is Edward, a hard-working brother in the Battle Office.
He was one of the many who found refuge at the branch.
Back then, someone told him to always remember how Jehovah protected and fed him.
He did remember, and his selves would joy, along with his brothers and sisters in Sierra
Leone.
Thank you so much for that.
Jehovah really has blessed the brothers and sisters in Sierra Leone.
Now you too, through your experience, you endured so much.
I wonder if you could share with us what were some of the lessons that you learned from
your experience?
Cecilia, what would you say?
For me, it's obedience.
I forcefully, I force myself.
To obey what the brothers said, to go in that room that I didn't like.
And I'm glad I force myself to obey, because as things turn out, the room that I really,
really preferred was the worst, that was damaged in the branch.
The food were all taken away, they destroyed the door, the gain access inside, they destroyed
the air condition, they destroyed everything beyond repair in that room.
Obedience saves our lives.
Well, we're really happy to Cecilia, and I understand that that other room now is your favorite
room.
It is my favorite, that's where the commentary ends.
And I very spot where we were hiding, that's where they put the bread shop.
When I collect my bread, I remember my story.
Laddie, what would you say, what lesson did you learn?
No matter how challenging the assignments may seem, or our dangerous situation may seem,
Jehovah is there.
And the international brotherhood too, their prayers on our behalf help us.
And if any other assignment like that comes our way, or willing to take it up, because
Jehovah is there for us, and our brothers, we also pray on our behalf.
Thank you so much, Laddie, and Cecilia, for sharing your beautiful experience with us.
It has been a very encouraging program, and we are so happy to have been able to get
to know some of the members of the 144th Class of Gilead.
We look forward to seeing and hearing experiences of our brothers and sisters living their
faith of displaying courage and enduring in their service to Jehovah.
We thank you very much for being with us, and we look forward to seeing you on another
edition of the Inside Story.